---
layout: post
title: Common data structures
date:   2024-03-31 00:00:00 +0000
categories:
  - algorithms
usemathjax: True
---

Stack
======

A stack is a data structure based on the **L**ast **I**n **F**irst **O**ut principle. A common example is a stack of 
cards or CD-ROM's, where the *last* item that was added to the stack will be the *first* one out when removing from the stack.

$\rightarrow$ In python, the default `list` class serves as an implementation of a stack; as you *append* to the end of the list, and 
the *pop* operation removes the last added item.

In this [post]({% post_url /algorithms/2024-03-30-traversals %}), we saw a recursive implementation of **pre-order** traversal of a binary tree. We can convert it into a iterative algorithm 
using a stack as follows:

```python
def pre_order_traversal(node):
    my_stack = [node]

    while my_stack:
        curr_node = my_stack.pop()
        print(curr_node.val)

        if curr_node.right is not None:
            my_stack.append(curr_node.right)
        if curr_node.left is not None:
            my_stack.append(curr_node.left)
```

**Note** that under the hood, recursive algorithms are evaluated using a stack. Whenever a recursive step is encountered, the corresponding function is pushed onto the 
stack. After the function has returned with some value, the item is popped out, so that the execution can proceed to the next step. 

1. **Given a string s containing just the characters $(, ), [, ], \\{, \\}$, determine if the input string is valid.**

We maintain a stack to keep track of the *latest* paranthesis scope. Any time we encounter an **open** paranthesis, we push it onto the stack. When 
we encounter a **closing** paranthesis, we pop from the stack and check if the *open-close* pair matches or not. If it doesn't match, then we have an invalid string.

```python
def valid_paranthesis(s):
    my_stack = []

    pair_hashmap = {
        '[' : ']',
        '{': '}',
        '(', ')',
    }

    for char in s:
        if char in ['(', '[', '{']:
            my_stack.append(char)
        else:
            last_open = my_stack.pop()
            if pair_hashmap[last_open] != char:
                return False

    return True
```

---

Queue
-------

A queue is a data structure that follows the **F**irst **I**n **F**irst **O**ut principle. A common example is people lined up in a queue at a bus stop. The person who came 
the *first* will be the *first* to board the bus.

$\rightarrow$ In python, use `deque` from `collections` module for queue implementation.

In this [post]({% post_url /algorithms/2024-03-30-traversals %}), we saw how a queue can be used to obtain a **level-order** traversal of a binary tree.